
Disha Patani is an Indian actress who works primarily in Hindi films. She began her acting career with the Telugu film Loafer (2015), opposite Varun Tej. After making her Bollywood debut in the sports biopic M.S. Dhoni: The Untold Story (2016), she starred in the Chinese action comedy Kung Fu Yoga (2017), which ranks among one of the highest-grossing Chinese films of all time. She went on to play the romantic interest of the lead male character in the commercially successful Hindi action films Baaghi 2 (2018) and Bharat (2019).
Patani comes from Uttarakhand.[3]
Patani debuted with a Telugu film, Loafer alongside Varun Tej in 2015.[4] She played the role of Mouni, a girl who runs from home to escape a forced marriage.[5] Directed by Puri Jagannadh and produced by C. Kalyan under C.K. Entertainment, the film was made on a budget of ₹200 million and performed poorly at the box office with a lifetime collection of ₹106 million.[6] In the following year, Disha appeared in a music video, Befikra along with Tiger Shroff which was produced by Bhushan Kumar and Krishan Kumar under T-Series and composed by Meet Bros. Written and directed by Meet Bros, the singer, Aditi Singh Sharma lent her voice.[citation needed]
Patani found her commercial break with Neeraj Pandey's M.S. Dhoni: The Untold Story, a biographical sports film based on the life story of Mahendra Singh Dhoni, the former captain of the Indian Cricket Team along with Sushant Singh Rajput and Kiara Advani.[7] She played the role of Priyanka Jha, the girlfriend of Mahendra Singh Dhoni who died in a car accident. Directed by Neeraj Pandey and produced by Fox Star Studios, the film was released on 30 September 2016 and was a massive hit with the collections of ₹ 2.16 Billion emerging to be the highest-grossing film for both Sushant Singh Rajput and Disha.[8] Her performance was widely accepted. In her review, Renuka Vyavahare of Times of India reviewed, "the performance of Disha in the film deserves a special mention as her performance tugs at your heartstrings."[9] In addition, she also starred in Jackie Chan's Kung Fu Yoga, along with Sonu Sood.[10]
Patani then acted in Baaghi 2 along with Tiger Shroff, a sequel to 2016 hit Baaghi also starring Tiger Shroff along with Shraddha Kapoor. Produced by Sajid Nadiadwala and directed by Ahmed Khan, the film was released on 30 March 2018 worldwide and grossed approximately ₹243 crore.[11]
[24]
