
Emmanuel Dapidran Pacquiao, OL GCrS PLH (/ˈpækiaʊ/ PAK-ee-ow; Tagalog: [pɐkˈjaʊ]; born December 17, 1978) is a Filipino professional boxer and politician currently serving as a Senator of the Philippines since 2016. Pacquiao is regarded by many boxing historians as one of the greatest professional boxers of all time.[1]
He is the only eight-division world champion in the history of boxing,[2] having won twelve major world titles,[3] as well as being the first boxer to win the lineal championship in five different weight classes.[4][5][6] Pacquiao is also the first boxer in history to win major world titles in four of the eight "glamour divisions" of boxing: flyweight, featherweight, lightweight and welterweight.[7][8][9]
He was named "Fighter of the Decade" for the 2000s by the Boxing Writers Association of America (BWAA), World Boxing Council (WBC), and World Boxing Organization (WBO). He is also a three-time Ring magazine and BWAA Fighter of the Year, winning the award in 2006, 2008 and 2009, as well as the winner of the Best Fighter ESPY Award in 2009 and 2011.[10] In 2016, Pacquiao was ranked No. 2 on ESPN's list of top pound for pound boxers of the past 25 years[11] and currently ranks No. 4 in BoxRec's ranking of the greatest pound for pound boxers of all time.[12] World-renowned boxing expert and historian Bert Sugar ranked Pacquiao as the greatest southpaw fighter of all time.[13]
Pacquiao has generated approximately 20 million in pay-per-view buys and $1.2 billion in revenue from his 25 pay-per-view bouts.[14] According to Forbes, he was the second highest paid athlete in the world as of 2015.[15]
Beyond boxing, Pacquiao has participated in basketball, business, TV hosting, acting, music recording and politics. In May 2010, Pacquiao was elected to the House of Representatives in the 15th Congress of the Philippines, representing the province of Sarangani. He was re-elected in 2013 to the 16th Congress of the Philippines.[16] In June 2016, Pacquiao was elected as a senator and will serve a six-year term until 2022.[17]
Pacquiao was born on December 17, 1978, in Kibawe, Bukidnon, Philippines. He is the son of Rosalio Pacquiao and Dionisia Dapidran-Pacquiao.[18] His parents separated when he was in sixth grade, after his mother discovered that his father was living with another woman.[18] He is the fourth among six siblings: Liza Silvestre-Onding and Domingo Silvestre (from the first husband of his mother) and Isidra Pacquiao-Paglinawan, Alberto "Bobby" Pacquiao and Rogelio "Ruel" Pacquiao.
Pacquio's early interest in combat sports was inspired by fighters such as the martial-artist Bruce Lee[19] and the boxer Muhammad Ali.[20]
Pacquiao married Jinkee Jamora on May 10, 2000. Together, they have five children, Emmanuel Jr. (Jimuel), Michael Stephen, Mary Divine Grace (Princess), Queen Elizabeth (Queenie) and Israel. His son, Jimuel, is an amateur boxer.[21] His daughter, Queenie, was born in the United States. He resides in his hometown of General Santos City, South Cotabato, Philippines.[22] However, as a congressman of the lone district of Sarangani, he is officially residing in Kiamba, Sarangani, the hometown of his wife.
Raised in the Roman Catholic faith,[23] Pacquiao is currently a practicing Evangelical Protestant.[24][25][26] Pacquiao said he once had a dream where he saw a pair of angels and heard the voice of God—this dream convinced him to become a devout believer.[27]
Pacquiao completed his elementary education at Saavedra Saway Elementary School in General Santos City, but dropped out of high school due to extreme poverty.[28] He left his home at age 14 because his mother, who had six children, was not making enough money to support her family.
He took and passed a high school equivalency exam in February 2007, which made him eligible for college education.[29] Pacquiao was awarded with a high school diploma by the Department of Education and enrolled for a bachelor's degree in business management at Notre Dame of Dadiangas University (NDDU) in his hometown of General Santos City.
On February 18, 2009, Pacquiao was conferred the Honorary Degree of Doctor of Humanities (Honoris Causa) by Southwestern University (SWU) at the Waterfront Cebu City Hotel & Casino in Lahug, Cebu City in recognition of his boxing achievements and humanitarian work.[30]
In preparation for his career as a lawmaker in the House of Representatives, Pacquiao enrolled in the Certificate Course in Development, Legislation and Governance at the Development Academy of the Philippines – Graduate School of Public and Development Management (DAP-GSPDM).[31]
On December 11, 2019, Pacquiao graduated from University of Makati in Makati City with a bachelor's degree in political science with major in local government administration through the Expanded Tertiary Education Equivalency and Accreditation Program (ETEEAP) of the Philippine Councilors League-Legislative Academy (PCCLA) which allows qualified Filipinos to complete a collegiate-level education via informal education system.[32][33]
Pacquiao is a military reservist with the rank of colonel in the Reserve Force of the Philippine Army.[34] Prior to being promoted to full colonel after finishing his General Staff Course (GSC) schooling, he held the rank of lieutenant colonel for being a member of the Philippine Congress as per the AFP's regulations for reservist officers. He first entered the army's reserve force on April 27, 2006, as a sergeant. Later, he rose to Technical Sergeant on December 1 of the same year. On October 7, 2007, he became a Master Sergeant, the highest rank in the enlisted personnel. On May 4, 2009, he was given the special rank of Senior Master Sergeant and was also designated as the Command Sergeant Major of the 15th Ready Reserve Division.[35]
Pacquiao started boxing at the age of 14 while living in the streets of Manila and turned professional when he was 16 years old. He had a record of 60–4 as an amateur and currently has a record of 62–7–2 as a professional, with 39 wins by knockout.
"Many of you know me as a legendary boxer, and I'm proud of that," he said. "However, that journey was not always easy. When I was younger, I became a fighter because I had to survive. I had nothing. I had no one to depend on except myself. I realized that boxing was something I was good at, and I trained hard so that I could keep myself and my family alive."[36]
Pacquiao made history by being the first boxer ever to win world titles in eight weight divisions, having won twelve major world titles, as well as being the first boxer to win the lineal championship in five different weight classes. Pacquiao is also the first boxer in history to win major world titles in four of the original eight weight classes of boxing, also known as the "glamour divisions": flyweight, featherweight, lightweight and welterweight.
He was named Fighter of the Decade for the 2000s by the Boxing Writers Association of America (BWAA), WBC and WBO. He is also a three-time Ring magazine and BWAA Fighter of the Year, winning the award in 2006, 2008 and 2009; and the Best Fighter ESPY Award in 2009 and 2011. BoxRec ranks him as the greatest Asian fighter of all time[37] and he was ranked second on ESPN's list of top pound for pound boxers of the past 25 years in 2016. Pacquiao was long rated as the best active boxer in the world, pound for pound, by most sporting news and boxing websites, including ESPN, Sports Illustrated, Sporting Life, Yahoo! Sports, About.com, BoxRec and The Ring, beginning from his climb to lightweight until his losses in 2012.[38][39] He is also the longest reigning top-ten active boxer on The Ring's pound for pound list from November 2003 to April 2016.[40] Over the course of his decorated career, Pacquiao has defeated 22 world champions—Chatchai Sasakul, Lehlohonolo Ledwaba, Jorge Eliécer Julio, Marco Antonio Barrera (twice), Érik Morales (twice), Óscar Larios, Jorge Solís, Juan Manuel Márquez (twice), David Díaz, Oscar De La Hoya, Ricky Hatton, Miguel Cotto, Joshua Clottey, Antonio Margarito, Shane Mosley, Brandon Ríos, Timothy Bradley (twice), Chris Algieri, Jessie Vargas, Lucas Matthysse, Adrien Broner and Keith Thurman.[41]
Pacquiao has also generated approximately 20 million in pay-per-view buys and $1.2 billion in revenue from his 25 pay-per-view bouts. According to Forbes, he was the second highest paid athlete in the world as of 2015.
In October 2018, Pacquiao signed with Al Haymon's Premier Boxing Champions (PBC) promotion[42] and currently holds the WBA (Super) welterweight title since July 2019.
On April 17, 2014, Pacquiao announced his intentions to join the Philippine Basketball Association (PBA) as the playing coach of Kia Motors Basketball team, an incoming expansion team for the PBA's 2014–15 season.[45][46][47] Though he can be the head coach of the incoming team, the league's commissioner, Atty. Chito Salud, clarified that all incoming players should join the PBA draft.[48] Pacquiao plays basketball as cross-training to keep himself in shape. He previously played in the semi-professional basketball league, Liga Pilipinas, for the MP-Gensan Warriors, a team that he also owns. He made his debut in the Smart-Liga Pilipinas Conference II on January 16, 2009.[49]
After the decision, Pacquiao was criticized by others, specifically online by netizens saying he could not handle boxing together with basketball. Pacquiao stated, "It will serve as a challenge for me, they do not know what they are saying, before I have also experienced this before I started boxing, but I proved them wrong."[50]
On July 9, 2014, he submitted his application for the upcoming rookie draft to the commissioner's office. His camp also hopes that the board of governors "respect" his request to be not drafted until Kia's turn.[51][52]
Pacquiao also owns a team in the PBA Developmental League (PBA D-League), the MP Hotel Warriors, which debuted in the league's 2014–15 season. He briefly was a co-owner of the Pacquiao Powervit Pilipinas Aguilas (now known as Pilipinas MX3 Kings), an Asean Basketball League team, as well as the founder of Maharlika Pilipinas Basketball League.[53]
Pacquiao was picked 11th overall in the first round of the 2014 PBA draft by the Kia basketball team, being the oldest rookie to be drafted in the Philippine Basketball Association.[54]
On February 8, 2015, Pacquiao tallied his first career point after making a shot in the free-throw on a match they won against the then-Purefoods Star Hotshots. He never scored again in the game in five minutes of action.[55]
On October 25, 2015, Pacquiao made his first field goal in the PBA in a 108–94 loss against the Rain or Shine Elasto Painters.[56][57]
On August 21, 2016, Pacquiao scored a career-high four points in a 97–88 victory against the Blackwater Elite, also sinking the first three-point field goal in his career.[58]
In 2016, Pacquiao was supposedly lined-up for the Senate Defenders basketball team in the UNTV Cup Season 5, but decided that he would not play in the tournament due to his existing contract as a player and coach of Mahindra Enforcer in the PBA.[59]
In 2017, when Pacquiao's three-year rookie deal as a player with the Picanto expired, the team didn't renew his contract again. Speculations swirled about Pacquiao possibly signing with the Blackwater Elite after its owner Dioceldo Sy said in an interview that he offered Pacquiao a roster spot and a coaching job. Four weeks later, his coaching contract with the Kia Picanto also expired, effectively making him available in the free agent market both as a coach and a player.[60]
In 2018, Pacquiao officially announced his retirement from the league.[61]
On September 3, 2018, Pacquiao played for the Senate Defenders team in the UNTV Cup Season 7. He scored 14 points in a winning effort for his tournament debut.[62][63][64]
Correct as of February 18, 2018[65][66]
Correct as of February 2, 2019[67]
On February 12, 2007, Pacquiao officially announced that he would be running for a seat in the Philippine House of Representatives in the May 2007 legislative election, aiming to represent the 1st District of South Cotabato province. He would run as the candidate of the Liberal Party faction under Manila mayor Lito Atienza that had affiliated with the government of president Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo.[68] Pacquiao, who has himself been known to be supportive of the Arroyo government, said that he was persuaded to run by local officials of General Santos City, who hoped he would act as a bridge between their interests and the national government.[68] But after the Philippine Supreme Court declared null and void all nominations of the Liberal Party faction under Atienza, Pacquiao ran under the Kabalikat ng Malayang Pilipino (KAMPI), a pro-Arroyo political party. Pacquiao was defeated in the election by incumbent Rep. Darlene Antonino-Custodio of the Nationalist People's Coalition (NPC), who said, "More than anything, I think, people weren't prepared to lose him as their boxing icon."[69]
On November 21, 2009, Pacquiao confirmed that he would run again for the congressional seat, but this time in Sarangani province, the hometown of his wife Jinkee.[70] He originally planned to run for congress under his own party, the People's Champ Movement (PCM), but has since joined the Nacionalista Party headed by Manny Villar. Villar said arrangements were made to accommodate Pacquiao's People's Champ Movement in a coalition with the Nacionalista Party for the May 2010 elections in Sarangani.[71]
On May 13, 2010, Pacquiao was officially proclaimed congressman of the lone district of Sarangani. He scored a landslide victory over the wealthy and politically well-entrenched Chiongbian clan that had been in power in the province for more than thirty years. Pacquiao got 120,052 votes while his opponent for the seat, Roy Chiongbian, got 60,899 votes.[72]
On June 28, 2010, Pacquiao took his oath of office as congressman before Supreme Court Associate Justice Antonio T. Carpio in the Provincial Capitol of Sarangani in Municipality of Alabel. He announced that he would transfer to president-elect Benigno "Noynoy" Aquino III's Liberal Party from Nacionalista Party as he wanted to ensure the entry of more projects to his province.[73]
Pacquiao later moved to the Partido Demokratiko Pilipino-Lakas ng Bayan (PDP-Laban) led by vice-president Jejomar Binay. He took his oath on April 16, 2012, in front of PDP-LABAN president and senator Aquilino Pimentel III and Secretary-General Joey de Venecia in preparation for the upcoming 2013 elections.[74] In congressional elections in 2013 he ran unopposed for his second term as congressman. Additionally, his wife, Jinkee, was also elected as vice-governor of Sarangani, while his younger brother, Rogelio was defeated by incumbent Rep. Pedro Acharon of Team PNoy in second district race in South Cotabato which includes General Santos City.
During the Sarangani's 1st district state of the district address on October 5, 2015, Pacquiao formally declared that he was running for senator under the United Nationalist Alliance (UNA) party of vice-president Jejomar Binay.[75] On May 19, 2016, Pacquiao was formally proclaimed as one of the winners of Philippine Senate seats by the Commission on Elections. At the proclamation ceremony, an elections commissioner introduced Pacquiao as the people's champion and called out his name in the same slow style that he is introduced in his world-famous bouts, drawing cheers from the audience. Pacquiao garnered over 16 million votes, landing 7th among 12 new members of the Senate.[76]
As a senator, Pacquiao has supported bringing back capital punishment in the Philippines.[77][78]
Pacquiao has also endorsed politicians outside the Philippines, in particular his secondary home country in the United States, as he endorsed Nevada senator Harry Reid and California governor Jerry Brown in November 2010.[79] Pacquiao also endorsed Republican Duke Aiona for Hawaii governor in 2014.[80]
Pacquiao started his acting career as an extra in some local films and guest appearances on ABS-CBN shows.
In December 2005, Pacquiao took his first lead role in Violett Films' Lisensyadong Kamao (Licensed Fist). The film is titled so because (according to director Tony Bernal), being a boxer, Pacquiao is licensed to use his hands.[citation needed]
In 2008, Pacquiao starred with Ara Mina and Valerie Concepcion in Anak ng Kumander (Child of a Commander). The movie was not a commercial success and was panned by critics.[citation needed]
Pacquiao starred in the superhero/comedy film entitled Wapakman, which was released on December 25, 2009, as an entry to the 2009 Metro Manila Film Festival.[81] Like his previous films, Wapakman was not commercially successful.[82]
Upon the expiration of his contract with ABS-CBN, Pacquiao signed with GMA Network as an actor in September 2007. On December 17, 2007, he taped his first episode of the networks infotainment show Pinoy Records.[83] His other projects with the network included Totoy Bato and the sitcom Show Me Da Manny in which his mother, Dionisia, also appeared.
In 2012, American actor Sylvester Stallone was reportedly in talks with Pacquiao over co-starring in one of Stallone's future films. The project did not push through as no further updates were given after the initial report.[84]
In 2011, Pacquiao appeared on Tosh.0 in which he was paired in a fight with Daniel Tosh. It resulted in Pacquiao winning in one punch.
In 2012, it was reported that Pacquiao would appear in his first Hollywood film, a film with the working title Brass Knuckles directed by Erick Geisler,[85] which would also feature other fighters and martial artists such as Hector Echavarria, Lyoto Machida, Anderson Silva and Frank Mir. Pacquiao was cast as a gangster. However, no new information has been released since the announcement.
Pacquiao has also turned to singing as part of his entertainment career. Most of the Tagalog songs of Pacquiao were composed by Lito Camo. The following are the songs from Manny Pacquiao's albums:
A film based on Pacquiao's life, Pacquiao: The Movie, was released on June 21, 2006, featuring Filipino actor Jericho Rosales as Manny Pacquiao and was directed by Joel Lamangan.[88] The film flopped at the box office, grossing a total of only P4,812,191 (approximately US$99,322), as confirmed by Lamangan.
Another film, based on Pacquiao's early life in boxing, Kid Kulafu, was released on April 15, 2015, featuring young actor Robert Villar as Emmanuel "Manny" Pacquiao. The film dramatizes the life of the Filipino boxing superstar during his childhood.
A documentary entitled "Manny", which featured Pacquiao's early life as well as his boxing and political career, was released with Liam Neeson as the narrator.[89]
Pacquiao is featured in the boxing video games Fight Night Round 2, Fight Night Round 3, Fight Night Round 4 and Fight Night Champion. EA Sports released a limited edition demo of Fight Night Round 4, featuring Pacquiao and Ricky Hatton prior to their May 2 fight.[90]
Pacquiao became the first Filipino athlete to appear on a postage stamp.[91]
Pacquiao became the first Filipino Olympic non-participant to be Team Philippines' flag-bearer during the August 8 opening ceremonies of the 2008 Summer Olympics at the Beijing National Stadium. Swimmer Miguel Molina, 2005 Southeast Asian Games' Best Male Athlete, yielded the honor to Pacquiao, upon the request of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo to the national sports officials on the Philippines at the 2008 Summer Olympics.[92]
Various business sectors have solicited Pacquiao's help in endorsing their products through commercial advertisements in print and in broadcast media. These include detergents, medicines, foods, beverage, garments, telecommunications and even a political ad for politicians during the 2007 and 2010 Philippine elections. Additionally, Pacquiao appeared in commercials for Nike's "Fast Forward" campaign (with Tiger Woods, Kobe Bryant, Maria Sharapova, Roger Federer, Cristiano Ronaldo and Liu Xiang). Pacquiao also appeared in a commercial for San Miguel Beer with Jet Li and Érik Morales.[citation needed]
Pacquiao was one of Time's 100 most influential people for the year 2009, for his exploits in boxing and his influence among the Filipino people.[93] Pacquiao was also included by Forbes in its annual Celebrity 100 list for the year 2009, joining Hollywood actress Angelina Jolie and fellow athletes Woods and Bryant.[94]
Forbes also listed Pacquiao as the world's equal sixth highest paid athlete, with a total of $40 million or ₱2 billion pesos (₱2,000,000,000.00) from the second half of 2008 to the first half of 2009. Tied with him on the sixth spot was NBA player LeBron James and golfer Phil Mickelson.[95] Pacquiao was again included in Forbes' list of highest paid athletes from the second half of 2009 to the first half of 2010; he was ranked eighth with an income of $42 million.[96] Pacquiao also won the 2009 ESPY Awards for the Best Fighter category, beating fellow boxer Shane Mosley and Brazilian mixed martial arts fighters Lyoto Machida and Anderson Silva.[97] ESPN Magazine reported that Pacquiao was one of the two top earning athletes for 2010, alongside American Major League Baseball player Alex Rodriguez. According to the magazine's annual salary report of athletes, Pacquiao earned $32 million (approximately PhP 1.38 billion) for his two 2010 boxing matches against Clottey and Margarito.[98]
Pacquiao has also appeared on the cover of Time magazine Asia for their November 16, 2009, issue. According to their five-page feature story, "(Pacquiao is) a fighter with enough charisma, intelligence and backstory to help rescue a sport lost in the labyrinth of pay-per-view. Global brands like Nike want him in their ads." They also added, "Pacquiao has a myth of origin equal to that of any Greek or Roman hero. He leaves the Philippines to make it even bigger, conquering the world again and again to bring back riches to his family and friends."[99] Pacquiao became the eighth Filipino to grace the cover of the prestigious magazine, after former Philippine presidents Manuel L. Quezon, Ramon Magsaysay, Ferdinand Marcos, Corazon Aquino, Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, Benigno "Noynoy" Aquino III and Filipino actress and environmentalist Chin Chin Gutierrez. Pacquiao was also featured on the cover of Reader's Digest Asia, where a seven-page story was written about the Filipino boxing superstar. The issue came out in November 2008, before Pacquiao's epic match against De La Hoya.
Pacquiao is also mentioned in some hip hop tracks including Kool A.D.'s song entitled "Manny Pacquiao" on his mixtape, 51. A few notable ones are Pitbull's "Get It Started", A$AP Rocky's "Phoenix", Bad Meets Evil and Bruno Mars' "Lighters", Eminem and Skylar Grey's "Asshole", Future's "Never Gon' Lose", Migos' "Chinatown", Nicki Minaj and Ciara's "I'm Legit" and Rick Ross's "High Definition", to name a few.[100]
On November 26, 2013, a few days after Pacquiao's victory over Brandon Ríos, the Philippine Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) issued a freeze order on all of Pacquiao's Philippine bank accounts due to his alleged failure to pay ₱2.2 billion in taxes for earnings he made in his fights in the United States from 2008 to 2009. A day after the bank account freeze, the BIR also issued an order to freeze all of Pacquiao's Philippine properties, whereupon Pacquiao presented documents to the press showing the income tax for non-resident alien payment by his promoter to the BIR's US counterpart, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), as well as a letter from Bob Arum.[101] In April 2017, Pacquiao, now a senator, approached Philippine authorities in an attempt to settle the case. The BIR had maintained that taxes were due even if all taxes had been paid to the IRS in the first place.[102]
In May 2012, Pacquiao was mistakenly quoted as saying "gay men should be put to death."[103] Pacquiao did not say those words.[104]
Pacquiao is against same-sex marriage and quoted as saying "God only expects man and women to be together and to be legally married."[105]
In February 2016, Pacquiao, in a video statement posted by TV5, made a comment on the issue of same-sex marriage. Pacquiao, in vernacular, described people in same-sex marriages as behaving worse than animals because animals generally do not have same-sex mating.[107] LGBT celebrities including comedian Vice Ganda, singer Aiza Seguerra, TV host Boy Abunda and the party-list Ladlad criticized the statements of the senatorial candidate. Pacquiao later apologized and stated that while, as a Christian, he is still against same-sex marriage, which is against Biblical teachings, he did not condemn gay people themselves.[108]Nike ended their longtime partnership with Pacquiao stating his comments against gay people were abhorrent.[109] The Grove at Farmers Market in Los Angeles also banned Pacquiao from the shopping mall.[110]
Towards the end of the video, Pacquiao clarified that he is not condemning gay people.
It was revealed following Mayweather vs. Pacquiao that Pacquiao had sustained an undisclosed injury to his right shoulder while training and that while it had healed in time for the fight, he re-injured it during the 4th round. As of 2015[update], Pacquiao is currently facing a lawsuit of 5 million dollars filed against him by two fans for failing to disclose the shoulder injury in the lead up to his bout with Floyd Mayweather.[112] Pacquiao failed to disclose the injury to the Nevada State Athletic Commission in the pre-fight injury evaluation.[113][114] The commission did a standard injury report with Pacquiao filling out the form saying that he had no injuries heading into the bout. Pacquiao said he had sustained the injury weeks out from the fight against Mayweather. However, after the lawsuit from the two fans was filed against him, Pacquiao has since said that he sustained the injury during the fight in which it flared up in the 3rd round.[115] The Nevada State Athletic Commission stated at the post fight press conference that they had only just found out about Pacquiao's injury that evening at the post fight press conference. Speculation arose that the injury was an excuse for the loss to Mayweather because Pacquiao did not mention an injury in the post fight interview with Max Kellerman. Pacquiao's promoter Bob Arum stated that Pacquiao suffered the injury back in 2008, causing even more confusion as Pacquiao, now facing a lawsuit, had just previously stated that he suffered the injury during the fight.[116]
International:
National:
