
Sebastián Marroquín (born Juan Pablo Escobar Henao, 24 February 1977)[1][2] is a Colombian architect, author, and the son of slain Colombian drug lord Pablo Escobar.
On December 2, 1993, the Colombian National Police located and then killed Pablo Escobar (aged 44), when Escobar, one of Medellíns most infamous criminals, made a phone call to his family. Escobar's location was tracked by a Colombian electronic surveillance team. After Escobar took notice of the police surrounding the building where he was hiding out, he fled to the rooftops together with a bodyguard, where he was shot dead by the police.
Juan Escobar, his mother, and his sister Manuela, first fled to Mozambique, then traveled on tourist visas to Argentina, where they ultimately remained and became citizens in exile from their native Colombia. Juan Pablo chose the name "Sebastián Marroquín" from the telephone book and adopted it as his new name since he needed a new identity as he believed his original name was cursed by a voodoo priest he encountered in Mozambique[citation needed]. Manuela now lives in Central North Carolina under an alias and works as an electrical engineer[citation needed].
Although he and his family continue to make money on the rights to Pablo Escobar's name and likeness (such as selling clothing bearing his likeness for extra income), and have tried three times (unsuccessfully) to register Escobar's name as a brand,[3] Marroquín prefers not to be linked with his father, which includes mention of his previous name; he is also determined to dissociate himself from the Medellín Cartel and the illegal drug trade in Colombia.
Marroquín graduated from college with a degree in architecture. He now lives in Palermo Soho, Buenos Aires with his wife and son, and works as an architect. He has since met with some of his father's victims. (See Sins of My Father, the 2009 documentary).
Marroquín has returned to Colombia twice for visits: to pay his respects at his father's grave and for the documentary's premiere. He was not allowed to enter Hacienda Nápoles for a return visit to Escobar's 20-square-kilometre (7.7 sq mi) estate 180 kilometres (110 mi) east of Medellin, confiscated by the Colombian government after Escobar's death and now managed by the municipality of Puerto Triunfo as a public park, campground, and museum of Escobar's crimes.[4]
Sins of My Father (2009), an Argentine movie documentary five years in the making, "followed Marroquín as he apologized to the sons of victims his late father ordered assassinated during a decade of terrorizing Colombia during his time as a major drug lord."[5] The film promoted reconciliation and ending hatred.[4]
Using his birth name, Juan Pablo Escobar, Marroquin authored the book Pablo Escobar: My Father (2014).[6][7][8] using items from his father's life as clothing highlights. The clothing line has yet to turn a profit. Marroquin had stated part of the money from his business ventures will go to his father's victims and Colombian charities.[citation needed]
Following the murder of a Netflix location scout for the crime drama series Narcos, Marroquín stated: "Nothing has changed except the names. Now there's even more drug-trafficking and corruption."[9]
